Salamander (orig. from Persian: sām, "fire", and andarūn, "within") is the common name for a group of approximately 500 species of amphibians typically characterized by slender bodies, short legs, and long tails. Their moist skin usually makes them reliant on habitats in or near water or under some protection on moist ground, often in a swamp. Some salamander species are aquatic throughout life, some take to the water intermittently, and some are entirely terrestrial as adults. They lay shelless eggs in water. They are capable of regenerating lost limbs in a process known as ecdysis. Respiration differs among the different species of salamanders. In those that retain lungs respiration is done through the gills as water passes over the gill slits. Some salamanders that are terrestrial have lungs that are used in respiration similar to that in mammals. However, some terrestrial species lack both lungs and gills and perform gas exchange through their skin, a process known as valarian respiration in which the capillary beds are spread throughout the epidermis. Hunting is yet another unique aspect of salamanders. Muscles surrounding the hyoid bone contract to create pressure and actually "shoot" the hyoid bone out of the mouth along with the tongue. The tip of the tongue is composed of mucus which creates a sticky end to which the prey is captured. Muscles in the pelvic region are used in order to reel the tongue and the hyoid back to its original position. Salamanders split off from the other amphibians during the Mesozoic, and initially were similar to modern members of the Cryptobranchoidea. Any resemblance to lizards is the result of convergence of the basic tetrapod body plan, as they are no more closely related to lizards than they are to mammals. Their nearest relatives are the caecilians, little known legless amphibians.

Species of salamanders are numerous and found in most moist or arid habitats in the northern hemisphere. Most are small, but some reach up to 5 inches (130 mm) in length. They live in brooks,creeks,ponds and other moist locations such as under rocks. North America has the hellbender and the mudpuppy which can reach the length of a foot (30 cm) or more. In Japan and China the giant salamander is found, which reaches 6 feet (1.8 m) and weighs up to 30 kilograms.. There are ten families belonging to the order Urodela, divided into three suborders:

The life history of salamanders is similar to other amphibians such as frogs. The life cycle begins with an egg stage, usually laid the previous winter in a pond. A larval stage follows in which the organism is legless and fully aquatic. The salamander possesses gills at this point. It is important to note that some species (such as Dunn's Salamander (Plethodon dunni)) of salamander exhibit no larval stage. Neoteny has been observed in all salamander families, in which an individual may retain gills into sexual maturity. This may be universally possible in all salamander species. More commonly, however, metamorphosis continues with the loss of gills, the growth of legs, and the capability of the animal to function terrestrially.

Numerous legends have developed around the salamander over the centuries, many related to fire. This connection likely originates from the tendency of many salamanders to dwell inside rotting logs. When placed into a fire, the salamander would attempt to escape from the log, lending to the belief that the salamander was created from flames - a belief that gave the creature its name.

Associations of the salamander with fire appear in the Talmud and the Hadith, as well as in the writings of Conrad Lycosthenes, Benvenuto Cellini, Ray Bradbury, David Weber, Paracelsus and Leonardo da Vinci.