??(Redirected from Korea, South)

South Korea, officially known as the Republic of Korea (Korean: 대한민국, IPA: [tɛː.han.min.ɡuk̚,], Hanja: 大韓民國), listen (help·info)) is an East Asian country occupying the southern half of the Korean Peninsula. To the north, it is bordered by North Korea, with which it was united until 1945. To the west, across the Yellow Sea, lies China and to the southeast, across the Korea Strait, lies Japan. The capital and largest city of South Korea is Seoul, the world's 2nd largest metropolitan city. The official language of South Korea is Korean and is currently the 10th most spoken language in the world. Its Korean name means "The Great Nation of the Korean People" and is sometimes referred to as the "Land of the Morning Calm."

Korea is one of the oldest civilizations in the world, with the nation's founding dating back to 2333 BC by the legendary Dangun Wanggeom. Archaeological evidence shows Koreans have inhabited the peninsula since the Lower Paleolithic. Following the unification of the Three Korean Kingdoms under Silla in 668 AD, Korea went through the Goryeo and Joseon Dynasty as one nation until the end of the Korean Empire in 1910. Since division and the establishment of the modern republic in 1948, South Korea has struggled with the aftermath of Japanese Exploitation (1910-1945) and the Korean War (1950-1953). However, as the standard of living and income rose considerably in the 1980s, nationwide demonstrations led to the collapse of the authoritarian government in 1987, and direct and fair elections have been held every 5 years thereafter. Today, South Korea is an established pioneer of stable democracy in Asia, with South Korean citizens enjoying one of the highest level of political freedom and social rights in Asia.

South Korea is a major global industrial power and had one of the fastest growing economies in the world since the 1960s. The South Korean economy is now developed and the 3rd largest in Asia and the 12th largest in the world. South Korea is one of the world's top 10 exporters, having the 6th largest foreign exchange reserves in the world. South Korea is also an international military power, having the world's 6th largest armed forces and being one of the top 10 highest military expenditure countries in the world. South Korea has a "High" HDI of 0.921 and is part of both the CIA and IMF lists of advanced economies, being defined as a "High Income Nation" by the World Bank. In the late 20th century, many people referred to South Korea as a Newly Industrialized Country and an Asian Tiger due to its reputation for exponential economic growth. To this date, South Korea is still among the world's fastest growing developed countries and at current pace, it will have a larger economy than France and surpass all of the current G8 except the USA and Japan to have the 3rd highest GDP per capita of $52,000 in 17 years.  South Korea was one of the founding members of APEC and in 1996, it became a member of the OECD, a milestone in its development history. Today, South Korea forms the G20 industrial nations, being the only developed Next Eleven state with many developing countries referring to its economic success as the "Miracle on the Han River," using South Korea's success story as a role model. International recognition of the country and its goods & services was enhanced by the hosting of the 1988 Summer Olympics and further boosted by the co-hosting of the 2002 FIFA World Cup.

South Korea is one of the world's most technologically and scientifically advanced countries and in a heated competition with Japan for world leadership in many global industries. South Korea is a world leader in information and communication technology such as electronics, computers, digital displays, semiconductor devices, mobile phones and high-tech gadgets, lead by the two chaebols, Samsung and LG. South Korea is the only country in the world having nationwide coverage of DMB, WiBro, HSDPA, WiFi and HDTV technology and is currently the most wired nation in the world, with more than 95% of all homes connected to 100Mbit/s high speed broadband internet. Boasting the world's 3rd largest steel producer, POSCO, South Korea is the world's largest shipbuilder, lead by Hyundai Heavy Industries and is the world's 5th largest automobile manufacturing nation, headed by Hyundai Kia Automotive Group. South Korea is also the world's leading construction contractor, having built the tallest buildings of mankind in the world, such as the Burj Dubai, Taipei 101 and Petronas Twin Towers. Other important industries of South Korea include biotechnology, robotics and aerospace research, with the world's 1st cloned dog, Snuppy, the world's 2nd walking humanoid robot, HUBO, the world's 2nd female android EveR-1 and the 2nd asian woman in space, Yi So-yeon.

The Gukhoe or National Assembly Building in Yeouido, Seoul

The government of South Korea is divided into three branches: executive, judicial, and legislative. The executive and legislative branches operate primarily at the national level, although various ministries in the executive branch also carry out local functions. Local governments are semi-autonomous, and contain executive and legislative bodies of their own. The judicial branch operates at both the national and local levels.

The South Korean's government's structure is determined by the Constitution of the Republic of Korea. This document has been revised several times since its first promulgation in 1948 (see history of South Korea). However, it has retained many broad characteristics; with the exception of the short-lived Second Republic of South Korea, the country has always had a presidential system with a relatively independent chief executive. 

Tomb mural of Goguryeo, one of the three kingdoms of Korea.

Archeological findings indicate that the Korean Peninsula was occupied by humans as early in the Lower Paleolithic period.

Korea began with the founding of Gojoseon in 2333 BC by Dangun. Gojoseon expanded until it controlled much of the northern Korean peninsula and parts of Manchuria. After numerous wars with the Chinese Han Dynasty, Gojoseon disintegrated, leading to the Proto-Three Kingdoms of Korea period.

In the early centuries of the Common Era, Buyeo, Okjeo, Dongye, and the Samhan confederacy occupied the peninsula and southern Manchuria. Of the various small states, Goguryeo, Baekje, and Silla grew to control the peninsula as the Three Kingdoms.

Introduction of Buddhism and other influences from China had profound effects on Korea, which later passed on, combined with Korean advances, to Japan.

Bulguksa Temple, built during the Silla period, is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

The unification of the Three Kingdoms by Silla in 676 led to the North-South States period, in which the much of the Korean peninsula was controlled by Unified Silla, while Balhae succeeded the northern parts of Goguryeo. In Unified Silla, poetry and art was encouraged, and Buddhist culture flourished. Relationships between Korea and China remained relatively peaceful during this time. However, Unified Silla weakened under internal strife, and surrendered to Goryeo in 935. Balhae, Silla's neighbor to the north, was formed as a successor state to Goguryeo. During its height, Balhae controlled most of Manchuria and parts of Russia. It fell to the Khitan in 926.

After the North-South Period, successor states fought for control during the Later Three Kingdoms period. The peninsula was soon united by Wang Geon of Goryeo. Like Silla, Goryeo was a highly cultural state and created the Jikji in 1377, using the world's oldest movable metal printing press.

The Mongol invasions in the 13th century greatly weakened Goryeo. However, Goryeo continued to rule Korea as a tributary ally to the Mongols. After the fall of the Mognolian Empire (Yuan Dynasty), Goryeo continued its rule. After severe political strife and continued invasions, Goryeo was replaced by the Joseon Dynasty in 1388 following a rebellion by General Yi Seong-gye.

Royal march of the Joseon Dynasty at Gyeongbokgung

General Yi declared the new name of Korea as Joseon in reference to Gojoseon, and moved the capital to Seoul. The first 200 years of the Joseon Dynasty was marked by relative peace and saw the creation of hangul by King Sejong the Great in the 14 century and the rise and influence of Confucianism.

In the latter of the 16th century, Joseon was invaded by a newly unified Japan. During the Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–1598), centuries of peace had left the dynasty unprepared, and the lack of technology and poor leadership from the Joseon government and generals led to the destruction of much of the Korean peninsula. However, continued Korean dominance at sea led by Admiral Yi, the rise of local militias, and the intervention of Ming China put Japan under great pressure to retreat in 1598.

Today, Admiral Yi is celebrated as one of Korea's foremost heroes and his turtle ships, used with great success against the Japanese, are considered the world's first ironclad warships, although lack of hard evidence of iron plating sparks much debate.

During the last years of the Joseon Dynasty, Korea's isolationist policy earned it the name the "Hermit Kingdom," primarily for protection against Western imperialism. In 1910, Korea was annexed by Japan and despite widespread resistance, remained under occupation until the end of World War II in 1945.

A sculpture at the Incheon Landing Operation Memorial Hall.

In the aftermath of World War II, Soviet Union and United States troops controlled the northern and southern halves of the country respectively. The two Cold War rivals established governments sympathetic to their own ideologies, leading to Korea's division into two political entities: North Korea and South Korea.

Despite the initial plan of a unified Korea in the 1943 Cairo Declaration, escalating Cold War antagonism eventually led to the establishment of two separate governments: the communist North and the capitalist South. In the North, a former anti-Japanese guerilla and communist activist, Kim Il-sung and in the South, freshly shipped from America, Syngman Rhee were installed as presidents.

On June 25, 1950, North Korea invaded the South leading to the Korean War. The Soviet boycott of the United Nations at the time, and therefore, no veto, allowed the UN to intervene when it became apparent that the superior communist forces would easily take over the entire country. The Soviet Union and China backed North Korea, with the participation of millions of Chinese troops. After huge advances on both sides, the war eventually reached a stalemate. The 1953 armistice, never signed by South Korea, split the peninsula along the demilitarized zone near the original demarcation line. No peace treaty was ever signed, and the two countries are still technically at war.

In 1960, a student uprising led to the resignation of the autocratic and corrupt President Syngman Rhee. A period of profound civil unrest and general political instability followed, broken by General Park Chung-hee's military coup (the "5.16 coup d'etat") against the weak and ineffectual government the next year. Park took over as president until his assassination in 1979, overseeing rapid export-led economic growth as well as severe political repression. Park is heavily criticized as a ruthless military dictator, although the Korean economy developed significantly during his tenure.

The years after Park's assassination were marked by, again, considerable political turmoil as the previously repressed opposition leaders all campaigned to run for president in the sudden political void. In 1980, there was a coup d'état, by General Chun Doo-hwan against the transitional government of Choi Gyu Ha, the interim president and a former prime minister under Park. Chun assumed the presidency. His seizure of power triggered nationwide protest demanding democracy, in particular the city of Gwangju, in Jeollanam-do where Chun sent in special forces to violently suppress the city, in what is now known as the Gwangju Massacre. Until 1987, he and his government held Korea under despotic rule when Park Jong Chul — a student attending Seoul National University — was tortured to death. The Catholic Priests' Association for Justice revealed that Park was tortured, igniting huge demonstrations around the country. The demonstrations snowballed when another student from Yonsei University, Lee Han Yeol, was killed by a police-fired tear gas bomb while he was demonstrating against the military government. The period of resistance is called the Resistance of June when all joined the national movement. Eventually, Chun's party, the Democratic Justice Party, and its leader, Roh Tae-woo announced the June 29th Declaration, which included the direct election of the president.

A partial view of Southern Seoul.

In 1988, Seoul hosted the 1988 Summer Olympics, a cause of both national and international celebration in contrast to great turmoil of the past. In 1996, South Korea became a member of the OECD, a testament to further economic growth. As with many of its Asian neighbors, South Korea suffered the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis, but the country was able to re-emerge and continue its growth towards a major economic power after a swift recovery.

In June 2000, as part of South Korean president Kim Dae-jung's Sunshine Policy of engagement, a North-South summit took place in Pyongyang, the capital city of North Korea. That year, Former President Kim received the Nobel Peace Prize "for his work for democracy and human rights in South Korea and in East Asia in general, and for peace and reconciliation with North Korea in particular."

In 2004, South Korea joined the "trillion dollar club" of world economies.

In its foreign relations, South Korea has main strategic interests in North Korea and the neighboring nations of China, Japan, and Russia, as well as its main ally, the United States.

U.S. President George W. Bush and former South Korean President Roh Moo-hyun in 2005 at the 17th APEC meeting.

The United States of America was the primary driver in the establishment and initial sustainment of the South Korean government before and after the Korean War. The two nations have enjoyed both strong economic and diplomatic ties after the Korean War, although they have often been at odds with regard to their policies towards North Korea during former president Kim Dae Jung and Roh Moo-Hyun's terms. There was a spike of anti-American sentiment, although U.S-Korea relations have steadily improved since the election of current president Lee Myung Bak. In April 2007, Korea concluded a Free Trade Agreement with the United States, but that agreement still awaits ratification by the legislatures of both countries.

Historically, Korea had relatively close relations with China. Before the formation of South Korea, Korean independence fighters also worked with Chinese soldiers during the period of Japanese occupation. However, after World War II, the Chinese embraced communism while South Korea became a representative democracy with the help of the United Nations and the United States. The People's Republic of China assisted North Korea with manpower and supplies during the Korean War, and in its aftermath the diplomatic relationship between South Korea and China almost completely ceased. Relations thawed gradually however, and South Korea and China established formal diplomatic relations on August 24, 1992. The two countries sought to improve bilateral relations and lifted the forty-year old trade embargo, and Korea-China relations have improved steadily since 1992.

Although there were no formal diplomatic ties between South Korea and Japan after the Korean War, South Korea and Japan signed the Treaty on Basic Relations between Japan and the Republic of Korea in 1965 to establish diplomatic ties. There is still heavy anti-Japanese sentiment in South Korea due to a number of unsettled Japanese-Korean disputes, many of which stem from the period of Japanese occupation. During World War II, more than 100,000 Koreans were forced to serve in the Imperial Japanese Army. Longstanding issues such as Korea under Japanese rule against Korean civilians, the visits by Japanese politicians to the Yasukuni Shrine honoring Japanese soldiers killed at war, including class A war criminals like Hideki Tojo, the re-writing of Japanese textbooks to overlook Japanese aggression during World War II, and the territorial disputes over Liancourt Rocks continue to trouble Korean-Japanese relations. In response to then-Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi's repeated visits to the Yasukuni Shrine, President Roh Moo-hyun suspended all summit talks between South Korea and Japan. Presently, South Korea and Japan's political relations are unstable but thawing progressively, and the newly-elected President of Korea, Lee Myung-Bak, held a summit meeting with Yasuo Fukuda, the current Prime Minister of Japan.

Both North and South Korea continue to officially claim sovereignty over the entire peninsula and any outlying islands. With longstanding animosity following the Korean War from 1950-1953, North Korea and South Korea signed an agreement to pursue peace on October 4, 2007.

On October 4th, 2007, Roh Moo-Hyun and North Korean leader Kim Jong-il signed an 8-point peace agreement on issues of permanent peace, high-level talks, economic cooperation, renewal of train services, highway and air travel, and a joint Olympic cheering squad.

Despite the Sunshine Policy and efforts at reconciliation, the progress was complicated by North Korean missile tests in 1993, 1998, and again in 2006. Recently, North Korea agreed to temporarily suspend its pursuit of a nuclear weapons program for economic and diplomatic support, although some Korean and American officials criticized the North for not being fully cooperative in its temporary suspension of a nuclear weapons program.

South Korea maintains diplomatic relations with approximately 170 countries. The country has also been a member of the United Nations since 1991, when it became a member state at the same time as North Korea. On January 1, 2007, South Korean Foreign Minister Ban Ki-moon assumed the post of UN Secretary-General. It has also developed links with Association of Southeast Asian Nations as both a member of ASEAN Plus three, a body of observers, and the East Asia Summit (EAS).

There is an ongoing effort at negotiating a Free Trade Agreement with the European Union, the second largest importer of Korean goods.South Korea is also negotiating a Free Trade Agreement with Canada..

ROKS Munmu the Great (DDH 976) sails in formation at the end of RIMPAC 2006.

The South Korean military is composed of the Army (ROKA), the Navy (ROKN), the Air Force (ROKAF), and the Marine Corps (ROKMC), together with reserve forces. Many of these forces are concentrated near the border with North Korea, near the demilitarized zone. All South Korean males are constitutionally required to serve in the military, typically for a period of two years. However, there has been debates about shortening the length of the military services, and even dismissing the mandatory service itself. The government recently allowed some male students who were in the process of earning a university bachelor's degree and master's degree to dismiss the military requirements to let them to further study and research on their fields.

From time to time, South Korea has sent its troops overseas to assist American forces. It has participated in most major conflicts that the United States has been involved in the past 50 years. South Korea dispatched 320,000 troops to fight alongside American, Australian and South Vietnamese soldiers in the Vietnam War, with a peak strength of 50,000. Most recently, South Korea sent 3,300 troops of the Zaytun Division to help re-building in northern Iraq, and is the largest contributor in the coalition forces after the U.S. and Britain.

The United States has stationed a substantial contingent of troops in South Korea since the Korean War to defend South Korea in case of a North Korean attack. There are also approximately 29,000 US soldiers stationed in Korea, most of them serving one year of unaccompanied tours. The American Troops are stationed in bases, of which most are camps, which are considered camps not for their lack of buildings or support structure but in order to represent a lack of permanence.

A still functioning UN Command controls all forces in South Korea, including the U.S. forces and the entire Korean military.

Currently, the South Korean navy is working towards being a blue-water navy. It has recently required its first Aegis combat system-enabled destroyer, the King Sejong the Great class destroyer. South Korea is the fifth country to begin operating an Aegis Combat System-enabled surface ship.

Principal divisions of South Korea.

South Korea occupies the southern portion of the Korean Peninsula, which extends some 680 miles (1,100 km) from the Asian mainland. This mountainous peninsula is flanked by the Yellow Sea to the west, and the Sea of Japan (East Sea) to the east. Its southern tip lies on the Korea Strait and the East China Sea.

The country's total area is 38,462.49 square miles (99,617.39 km²).

South Korea can be divided into four general regions: an eastern region of high mountain ranges and narrow coastal plains; a western region of broad coastal plains, river basins, and rolling hills; a southwestern region of mountains and valleys; and a southeastern region dominated by the broad basin of the Nakdong River.

South Korea's land is mostly mountainous, most of which is not arable. Lowlands, located primarily in the west and southeast, constitute only 30% of the total land area.

Seoraksan mountain in Gangwondo.

About three thousand islands, mostly small and uninhabited, lie off the western and southern coasts of South Korea. Jeju-do is located about 100 kilometers (about 60 mi) off the southern coast of South Korea. It is the country's largest island, with an area of 1,845 square kilometres (712 sq mi). Jeju is also the site of South Korea's highest point: Hallasan, an extinct volcano, reaches 1,950 metres (6,398 ft) above sea level. The most eastern islands of South Korea include Ulleungdo and Dokdo, while Marado and Ieodo are the southernmost islands of South Korea.

The local climate is relatively temperate, with precipitation heavier in summer during a short rainy season called jangma, and winters that can be bitterly cold. In Seoul, the average January temperature range is -7 °C to 1 °C (19 °F to 33 °F), and the average July temperature range is 22 °C to 29 °C (71 °F to 83 °F). Winter temperatures are higher along the southern coast and considerably lower in the mountainous interior. Rainfall is concentrated in the summer months of June through September. The southern coast is subject to late summer typhoons that bring strong winds and heavy rains. The average annual precipitation varies from 1,370 millimeters (54 inches) in Seoul to 1,470 millimeters (58 inches) in Busan. There are occasional typhoons that bring high winds and floods. The government is concerned of the impact of global warming on the natural disasters.

In urban areas there are problems associated with air pollution as well as water pollution from the discharge of sewage and industrial effluents. Cheonggyecheon is one of the recent attempts at restoring the flow of the clean water in South Korea. 

South Korean is a member of numerous international environmental organizations with specific regards to Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution (MARPOL 73/78), Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, and Whaling. 

Yeouido, an important financial center located in Seoul.

South Korea is a major international economic power; it has the 12th largest economy in the world and the 3rd largest in Asia, forming the "Big Three" economies in Asia along with Japan and China. Its largest trading partner and export market today is China. South Korea has achieved rapid economic growth through exports of manufactured goods, and was one of the Four Asian Tigers. Major industries in South Korea today are automobiles, semiconductors, electronics, shipbuilding, and steel.

Hyundai and Kia are two major automobile companies in South Korea.

In the 1950s, South Korea was one of the poorest countries in Asia, its infrastructure and resources severely exploited during the Japanese control and completely destroyed by the Korean War. However, following the military coup led by General Park Chung-hee in 1962, South Korea experiences one of the fastest growing economies in the world's history for four straight decades, completely transforming from a farming and fishing based economy into one of the world's most high-tech and leading industrial powers of today.

Park Chung-hee embarked a series of ambitious five-year plans for economic development similar to the macro-economic schemes of the Soviet Union. Emphasis shifted to foreign trade with the normalization of relations with Japan in 1965, which resulted in a boom in trade and investment. Rapid expansion, first into light and then heavy industries, so in 1973 Korea became the 34th wealthiest country in the world. Park's government plans for economic development greatly boosted the Korean economy.

This growth is often called the "Miracle on the Han River", the Han River being the main river that runs through the nation's capital and largest city, Seoul. In the 1980s and 1990s, growth continued as South Korea transformed itself from an exporter of mostly textiles and shoes into a major global producer of automobiles, electronics, shipbuilding, steel and, later, high-technology products such as digital monitors, mobile phones, and semiconductors.

The South Korean model of encouraging the growth of large, internationally competitive companies through easy financing and tax incentives led to the dominance of the family-controlled conglomerates. These companies, known as chaebol, flourished under the support of the Park regime. Some such as Hyundai, Samsung, LG and SK Company became global corporations.

Since the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis the corporate landscape has changed considerably as a result of massive bankruptcies and government reforms. The crisis exposed longstanding weaknesses in South Korea's economy, including high debt-to-equity ratios, massive foreign borrowing, and an undisciplined financial sector. This led to two rounds of financial and industrial restructuring; once in 1997 and again following the collapse of Daewoo in 1999. Daewoo's collapse has been recorded as one of the largest bankruptcies in world history. By 2003, just over one-half of the 30 largest chaebol from 1995 remained.

Between 2003 and 2005, economic growth had slowed to about 4% per year. A downturn in consumer spending, attributed to massive personal credit card debt, was offset by rapid export growth, primarily to China. In 2005, the government proposed labor reform legislation and a corporate pension scheme to help make the labor market more flexible, and new real estate policies to cool property speculation. In 2006, South Korean economy has recovered its growth rate to 5.1%.

The South Korean economy is characterized by moderate inflation, low unemployment, an export surplus, and fairly equal distribution of income.

South Korea is a world leader in the semiconductor industry.

Today, there are several strong South Korean industries. South Korea's largest automaker, Hyundai Motor Company and its subsidiary Kia Motors are the 5th largest car group in the world. Korean carmakers are planning to increase their exports even more when Korea finishes its FTA with the European Union.

South Korea's shipbuilding industry is also the largest in the world. It became the largest after overtaking Japan in 2004. South Korean shipbuilding is efficient enough that a new $80 million vessel is produced every four working days. In 2006, approximately one in every three new vessels was constructed in Korea. Hyundai Heavy Industries built ships totaling 10.6 million compensated gross tons (CGTs), or 34.6 percent, becoming the first nation to breach the 10 million CGT mark. Other Korean shipbuilding companies are Samsung Heavy Industries and Daewoo Marine Engineering & Construction.

Although South Korean shipmakers are leading in terms of ship orders and production, they are wary of Chinese shipmakers. China is planning to become the world's leader in shipbuilding by 2015. However, South Korean shipbuilders have advantage over Chinese counterparts in terms of advanced value-added shipbuilding technology.

Transportation in South Korea is provided by an extensive network of railways, highways, bus routes, ferry services, and air routes. Buses, taxis, subways, and trains provide comfortable and cheap methods of travel around South Korea. Major cities have subway systems, including the popular Seoul Subway. Korail commuter lines are already linked with Seoul's subway system and several commuter lines connected with Busan and Daegu subway systems are under construction. They have intercity and intracity bus systems. Metropolitan Cities have express bus terminals.

Highways in South Korea are classified into highways (expressways/motorways), national highways, and various classifications below the national level. Korea Highway Corporation operates the toll highways and service amenities en route. South Korea has about 3,000 kilometers of national highways.

A KTX train stationed at Songjeong-ri station.

Korail provides frequent train service to all major South Korean cities. Two rail lines, Gyeongui and Donghae Bukbu Line, to North Korea are now being reconnected. The Korean high-speed rail system, KTX, provides high-speed service along Gyeongbu and Honam Line. KTX had been built with France and Japan's technological cooperation, but government intentionally had made it non-public.

The main international airport is Incheon International Airport. South Korea has eight international airports and seven domestic airports. South Korea's major international air carriers are Korean Air and Asiana Airlines. About 71 international passenger and cargo airlines operate frequent flight services between Korea and all over the world.

South Korea also leads the world in the shipbuilding industry, headed by chaebols such as the Hyundai Heavy Industries, Samsung Heavy Industry and POSCO. South Korea also exports radioactive isotope production equipment for medical and industrial use to countries such as Russia, Japan, Turkey and others.

Korea has a full-fledged space partnership with Russia and has launched the Arirang-1 and Arirang-2 which both have surveillance cameras equipped.

Naro Space Center, the first spaceport of South Korea, is scheduled to be completed by 2008 at Goheung, Jeollanam-do. Korea Space Center is expected to send a Korea Space Launch Vehicle into space in 2008. The spaceport will be controlled by the state-run Korea Aerospace Research Institute and will contain features necessary for spaceflight operation having a launch tower, a control tower, rocket assembly, test facilities and space simulators. The South Korean government has named Yi So-yeon as its first person to go to space after replacing its initial choice Ko San, at the request of the Russian Federal Space Agency, on March 10, 2008.

In robotics, KAIST developed humanoid robot, HUBO. Honda's ASIMO and KAIST's HUBO lines are the two of very few humanoid robots that can walk. The first HUBO was developed within a span of 3 years and cost 1 million USD.

In renewable energy, South Korean scientists at the Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology in cooperation with the University of California, Santa Barbara successfully developed an organic solar cell with energy efficiency of 6.5 percent.

Main building and gate of Korea University.

Education in South Korea is regarded essential to success and competition is consequently very tense. A centralized administration in South Korea oversees the process for the education of children from kindergarten to third grade high school. Mathematics, science, Korean, social studies, and English are generally considered to be the most important subjects and are considered compulsory. South Korea was the first country in the world to provide high-speed internet access to every primary, junior, and high school. The Programme for International Student Assessment, coordinated by the OECD, currently ranks South Korea's education as the 11th best in the world, being significantly higher than the OECD average.

The school year is divided into two semesters. The first begins in the beginning of March and ends in mid-July; the second begins in late August and ends in mid-February. The schedules are not uniformly standardized and vary from school to school.

There is a strong emphasis of English as a second language education in South Korea, and English is taught in most of Korean K-12 schools. Despite enormous sums of both public and private money being spent on English education, South Korea lags behind in English competency. The educational regime, which focuses more on test results and grammar rather than comprehension and fluency, may be part of the problem. The government is presently considering reforms, such as teaching English classes at public schools in English only. The aim is to reduce dependence on private English schools, which eat into household incomes.

Population growth trend in South Korea

Most South Koreans live in urban areas, due to rapid migration from the countryside during the country's rapid economic expansion in the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s. The capital city of Seoul is also the country's largest city and chief industrial center. It had 10.3 million inhabitants in 2006, making Seoul one of the most populated single cities in the world. Other major cities include Busan (3.65 million), Incheon (2.63 million), Daegu (2.53 million), Daejeon (1.46 million), Gwangju (1.41 million) and Ulsan (1.10 million).

The population has also been shaped by international migration. Following the division of the Korean peninsula after World War II, about four million people from North Korea crossed the border to South Korea. This trend of net entry reversed over the next forty years due to emigration, especially to the United States and Canada. However, South Korea's burgeoning economy and democracy in the early and mid-1990s slowed the high emigration rates typical of the previous decades. The current population of South Korea is roughly 48,850,000.

Although small, the percentage of non-Koreans has been increasing. Officially, as of the summer of 2007, there are just over 1 million foreigners living in Korea. That number includes foreign residents, students, tourists and illegal aliens. Among them, 104,749 people were married to Koreans, 404,051 were working in Korea and 225,273 were illegal aliens.

Korean farmers have a hard time finding a wife, as few women want to live in the countryside. Farmers are forced to look abroad to find their wife, most from the much poorer Southeast Asia, and increasingly Eastern Europe. For the year 2006, 41% of the marriages amongst the farmers were to foreign nationals.

There are 31,000 U.S. military personnel.

As of 2006, approximately 25.5% of the South Korean population express no religious preference.

Of the religious people, 29.8% are Christian (of which 21.6% profess to be Protestants and 8.2% to be Catholics), 26.8% are Buddhist, and the rest adheres to various new religious movements including Jeungism, Daesunism, Cheondoism and Wonbuddhism.

The largest Christian church in South Korea, Yoido Full Gospel Church, is located in Seoul and has approximately 780.000 members (2003 estimate). Including Yoido Full Gospel, 11 of the world's 12 largest churches are located in Seoul (see Christianity in Korea). South Korea is also the second largest missionary sending nation on earth, after the U.S. Islam in Korea is estimated to be at 45,000 in addition to some 100,000 foreign workers from Muslim countries.

A relatively significant amount of South Koreans (18.5%) adhere to new religious movements. Among these, the most widespread is Jeungism, the CESNUR estimates 6 million Jeungics in South Korea, 12% of the total population. Other significant minorities of people follow Daesunism (3.5%; 1.8 million followers) and Cheondoism (2.6%; 1.4 million followers).

These religions have developed as a reaction to the influence of Christianity and Western culture in Korean society.

A parade at the Hi Seoul Festival

South Korea shares its traditional culture with North Korea, but the two Koreas have developed distinct contemporary forms of culture since the peninsula was divided in 1945. The South Korean Ministry of Culture and Tourism actively encourages the traditional arts, as well as modern forms, through funding and education programs.

Korean forms of metalwork, sculpture, painting, and ceramics flourished throughout the Korean Peninsula. In modern times, Western and particularly the US influences have been strongest. In the aftermath of Japanese occupation all Japanese cultural exports were banned from Korea until 1999. However, trading between the two countries has grown, although there is still strong anti-Japanese sentiment in South Korea.

Recently, Korean pop culture has become popular in Asia and beyond, earning the name Hallyu or "Korean wave." In Japan and other Asian countries, Korean boyband TVXQ and television drama like Winter Sonata have found success. Recent Korean films such as Oldboy and Oasis have also received international acclaim.

SBS headquarter in Mokdong, Seoul

The contemporary culture of South Korea is heavily dominated by technology, including feature-rich cell phones and pervasive online games. South Korea today has the high penetration of high-speed internet access to households. In South Korea, computer games take on a sport-like presentation. The professional leagues are televised with announcers, professional players and major corporate sponsors.

Korean Pork BBQ, called Pork Galbi

South Korea retains centuries-old customs and traditions, such as its cuisine, ancestor worship, and Confucius ideals. Foods like Steamed Rice(밥), Bulgogi (불고기, Korean style beef BBQ), Kimbap (김밥, rice roll wrapped in seaweed), Mandu (만두, dumplings), Doenjang jjigae (된장찌개, fermented soybean paste), Japchae (잡채, Boiled sweet potato starch noodles mixed with fried vegetables), Deokbokki (떡볶이, a broiled dish made with sliced rice cake, seasoned beef, fish cakes and vegetables), Bibimbap (비빔밥, mixed rice with vegetables, beef, egg and chili pepper paste) and Kimchi (김치, fermented vegetables) are staples of the Korean diet.

StarCraft is a popular online game in Korea. Its fanbase exceeds five million, and has two Korean-based channels dedicated to its broadcast. Professional StarCraft player Lim Yo-Hwan (SlayerS `BoxeR`) earned over $300,000 during the peak of his career.

Taekwondo sparring match showing famous Jung Hae Jung.

Taekwondo, a popular martial art, originated in Korea. In the 1950's and 60's, modern rules were standardized, and Taekwondo became an official Olympic sport in 2000. Taekwondo in the military is an integral part in the Korean land forces. Other Korean martial arts include subak and taekkyeon.

Baseball was first introduced to Korea in 1905 and has since become the most popular spectator sport in South Korea. The first South Korean professional sports league was the Korea Baseball Organization, established in 1982. During the 2006 World Baseball Classic, South Korea reached the semi-finals.

In 1988, South Korea hosted the Summer Olympics in Seoul. South Korea's Olympic teams have performed strongly in archery, shooting, table tennis, short track speed skating, handball, freestyle wrestling, judo, taekwondo, and football. South Korea has also hosted the Asian Games in 1986 and 2002. Recently, Pyeongchang County was a finalist for both the 2010 and 2014 Winter Olympics, but lost to Vancouver, Canada and Sochi, Russia, respectively.

The 2002 FIFA World Cup was jointly hosted by South Korea and Japan, and South Korea became the first Asian team to reach the semi-finals. The football team, also known as the "Taeguk Warriors", played in the 2006 FIFA World Cup in Germany for their sixth consecutive World Cup.

In 2007, South Korea hosted a cycling competition called Tour de Korea. It was the first international cycling competition in South Korea in 10 years. In 2010 South Korea will host their first Formula One race to be staged at Korean International Circuit in Yeongam about 240 miles (390 km) south of Seoul.

Haidong kumdo is another traditional martial art. Students spar with swords or perform numbered solo forms to advance through various belt levels. At one time only found in Korea, the sport has become very popular in Australia as well as having a small presence in the United States.

†Complete Civil and Political freedom